(MALE NARRATOR)
TODDLERS ARE ACTIVE,
IMPULSIVE AND EMOTIONAL.
THAT'S THE KIND
OF BEHAVIOR
YOU EXPECT FROM
A TWO- OR THREE-YEAR OLD.
BUT WHEN AN OLDER CHILD
CONTINUES TO BEHAVE THAT WAY,
HE MAY BE SUSPECTED
OF HAVING
ATTENTION DEFICIT HYPERACTIVITY
DISORDER OR ADHD.
AT AGE THREE,
I TOOK MY CHILDREN
TO DAYCARE FOR THE FIRST TIME.
I STARTED GETTING THESE
COMPLAINTS FROM THE TEACHER
ABOUT THE CHILDREN
MISBEHAVING,
PUSHING
OTHER CHILDREN,
NOT LISTENING
TO THE OTHER ADULTS.
THEN AT AGE FOUR,
I TOOK THEM
TO A LARGER CENTER.
I THOUGHT MAYBE IF
I WOULD SEPARATE THE BOYS
THAT THAT WOULD
BE BETTER FOR THEM.
AND THEY SPENT THE DAY
LOOKING FOR EACH OTHER
AND MISBEHAVING.
THE TEACHERS COMPLAINED
AND SO I THOUGHT,
"THIS IS NEW FOR THEM,
THEY'RE NOT ACCUSTOMED TO BEING
AROUND ALL THESE CHILDREN."
IT WAS VERY TRAUMATIC FOR
THE CHILDREN IN KINDERGARTEN.
THEY WERE NOT ABLE
TO FOLLOW THE RULES,
THEY WERE SASSING
THE TEACHERS,
THEY WERE PUSHING
AND HITTING,
NOT ABLE
TO WAIT IN LINE,
VERY IMPULSIVE BEHAVIOR.
I THOUGHT, I NEED
TO TAKE THEM TO THE DOCTOR.
AND THE TEACHERS
HAD OBSERVED
THIS KIND OF BEHAVIOR
IN OTHER CHILDREN
AND SUGGESTED MAYBE THE BOYS
WERE ADHD OR ADD
AND I HAD NEVER HEARD
OF THESE TERMS, OF COURSE.
(NARRATOR)
BACK IN THE 1940S,
THE ADHD CHILD
WAS MISUNDERSTOOD,
EVEN LABELED,
"MENTALLY RETARDED."
AND AFTER SEVERAL
DECADES OF RESEARCH
AND A BETTER
UNDERSTANDING,
IT'S STILL A DISORDER
SURROUNDED BY CONTROVERSY.
THERE ARE STILL
SOME PEOPLE--
THEY KNOW ABOUT
HYPERACTIVITY--
BUT THEY DON'T KNOW
ABOUT ATTENTION DEFICIT
AND THEY THINK THAT IT'S POOR
MOTIVATION OR BAD ATTITUDE,
AND THAT WE'VE LOST SOME OF OUR
BEING STRICT WITH KIDS.
THINGS ARE
TOO SOFT NOWADAYS.
IF WE GET STRICT WITH THEM
AND GET TOUGH,
WE WOULDN'T
HAVE ALL THIS.
I THINK ONE OF THE--
THAT OUR SCHOOL
DISTRICT FACES--
IS THE ISSUE OF A NUMBER
OF MINORITY STUDENTS
BEING IDENTIFIED
FOR ADHD.
AND WHAT WE'RE LOOKING
AT IS A GROUP OF KIDS
THAT MAY NOT CULTURALLY FIT
WITHIN A CLASSROOM.
AND BECAUSE
THEY DON'T FIT,
THEIR BEHAVIOR
IS SEEN AS
NOT BEING ABLE
TO PAY ATTENTION,
BEING IMPULSIVE,
NOT FOLLOWING DIRECTIONS
THAT TEACHERS GIVE THEM,
BEING JUST GENERALLY
DIFFICULT TO DEAL WITH,
AND AS A RESULT
OF THAT,
BEING REFERRED
FOR POSSIBLE ADHD.
SOMETHING HAS
TO BE GOING ON
FOR A CHILD TO DISPLAY
THIS KIND OF BEHAVIOR
AND I'M CONVINCED NOW.
I THOUGHT THERE'S SOMETHING
THAT I'M NOT DOING.
BUT TO SEE THE CHANGE
IN THE BOYS
FROM WHEN THEY WERE NOT
TAKING THE MEDICATION AND NOW,
I KNOW THAT IT HAS TO BE
A PHYSIOLOGICAL KIND OF PROBLEM.
(NARRATOR)
PART OF THE PROBLEM
IS IN THE WAY
THE DISORDER IS DIAGNOSED.
ATTENTION DEFICIT
HYPERACTIVITY DISORDER
IS A CLINICAL DIAGNOSIS.
THERE AREN'T ANY TESTS
YOU CAN ORDER.
YOU CAN'T SEND A CHILD
INTO A DOCTOR
AND EXPECT HIM
TO SEND YOU TO THE LAB,
GET A BLOOD TEST,
EKG, OR CAT SCAN
AND DIAGNOSE
THE PROBLEM.
IT'S A DIAGNOSIS MADE
BY TAKING HISTORY
AND WHAT YOU DO IS ASK
ABOUT KEY SYMPTOMS
AND IF A CHILD HAS THE RIGHT
NUMBER OF SYMPTOMS,
THEN HE MEETS THE CRITERIA
FOR THE DIAGNOSIS.
IT IS BASICALLY
A DIAGNOSIS MADE
BY CAREFUL EXAMINATION
OF THE BEHAVIORS OF THE CHILD.
AND YOU LEARN THIS THROUGH
TALKING WITH PARENTS, TEACHERS,
OTHER INDIVIDUALS IN
THE CHILD'S ENVIRONMENT.
(NARRATOR)
WHAT KINDS OF BEHAVIORS
ARE THEY WATCHING FOR?
WELL, FIRST, IS THE CHILD
EASILY DISTRACTED?
DOES HE HAVE
A HARD TIME
PAYING ATTENTION,
STAYING ON TASK?
ONE THING I SEE
IS A CHILD WHO
MAY NOT BE ABLE
TO SIT DOWN
FOR A LONG TIME
AND ANSWER QUESTIONS--
WHO MAY NOT BE ABLE
TO SIT AND WRITE.
WHEN IT'S ONE ACTIVITY
YOU'RE ASKING
THEM TO DO
FOR LONGER THAN
FIVE MINUTES,
THAT'S OFTEN
DIFFICULT FOR THEM.
THEY FIDGET, THEY STAND,
THEY TWIRL PENCILS,
THEY TAP,
THEY TWITCH THEIR FEET.
SOMETIMES THEY DAYDREAM
OR STARE OFF INTO SPACE
OR THEY JUST
DON'T GIVE YOU
ANY OF THE NORMAL
ATTENDING BEHAVIORS
THAT YOU SEE IN GENERAL
IN THE CLASSROOM.
THEN PEOPLE WILL SAY,
"IT MUST NOT BE
ATTENTION DEFICIT.
"HE OR SHE CAN CONCENTRATE
FOR A LONG TIME,
I'VE SEEN THEM
WATCH CARTOONS."
WELL, MAYBE THAT'S WHAT
REALLY EXCITES THEM
BUT YOU DON'T REALLY KNOW
A PERSON'S PERFORMANCE LEVEL
IN TERMS
OF CONCENTRATING
UNTIL THEY HAVE
TO DO A TASK
THAT ISN'T REALLY
INTERESTING TO THEM.
THAT'S WHEN YOUR ABILITY
TO FOCUS IS TESTED.
YOU HAVE TO PULL ON
SOMETHING WITHIN YOU
TO KEEP YOUR
ATTENTION ON IT.
IF YOU DON'T HAVE THAT ABILITY,
YOU'RE GONNA FALL APART.
(NARRATOR)
SECOND, IS THE CHILD
VERY EMOTIONAL OR EASILY UPSET?
MY BOYS,
PARTICULARLY ONE OF THEM,
HE HAS ALL OF THAT
AND IT'S FRIGHTENING IN A SENSE
BECAUSE I GET CONCERNED.
WHEN WILL IT END?
WHEN WILL HE
BE ABLE TO CONTROL IT?
IN ALL FAIRNESS
TO HIM,
HE IS CONTROLLING IT
MUCH BETTER NOW
THAN HE DID A YEAR AGO
OR TWO YEARS AGO--
TURNING OVER THE TABLE
IN THE PLAYROOM,
GETTING ANGRY
AND THROWING TOYS,
AND BODY JUST BECOMING
VERY, VERY RIGID,
JUST THE GRITTING OF THE TEETH
AND THE FISTS TOGETHER.
I MEAN
EXTREMELY ANGRY.
WHEN THIS CHILD
WAS UPSET,
THE TEACHER EVACUATED
THE WHOLE CLASS
UNTIL SOMEBODY CAME DOWN
TO WORK WITH THIS CHILD.
THAT WAS
THE PROCESS.
THE CHILD WOULD
LITERALLY CLIMB WALLS
AND LITERALLY CLIMB ON DESKS
AND START THROWING THINGS
AND IT MAY
HAVE STARTED OFF
BY JUST SOMEBODY INVADING
HIS PERSONAL SPACE,
SOMEBODY TOUCHING
HIS DESK.
THE KID WITH
ATTENTION DEFICIT PROBLEMS,
IT'S LIKE ALL
THE CHANNELS ARE OPEN.
YOU CAN IMAGINE WHEN THINGS
ARE POURING IN AT YOU,
ANYBODY TENDS TO GET
PRETTY IRRITABLE AND SENSITIVE.
AND WE OFTEN SAY
TO A TEACHER,
"HOW DO YOU FEEL
WHEN SIX KIDS
ARE TRYING TO GET
YOUR ATTENTION?"
YOU GET
PRETTY IRRITATED.
IT REALLY GETS YOU
IN THIS IRRITABLE MOOD.
THIS IS HOW THESE KIDS
FEEL ALL THE TIME.
IF YOU WANT
TO UNDERSTAND
EMOTIONAL VOLATILITY
OR OVERAROUSAL,
YOU HAVE TO REALIZE
THEY'RE NOT ABLE
TO BE SELECTIVE ABOUT WHAT
THEY'RE PAYING ATTENTION TO.
(NARRATOR)
AND THIRD, IS HE
IMPULSIVE OR AGGRESSIVE?
(TEACHER)
IT'S CHILDREN WHO--
IF THEY GET INTO
A SITUATION WITH A FRIEND
WHO ACCIDENTALLY
TAPPED THEM ON THE BACK
OR A PENCIL
GOT FLUNG--
THEY REACT
WITHOUT THINKING.
YOU SEE THAT
WITH WORDS, BEHAVIORS.
A LOT OF PROBLEMS
WITH JUST STANDING IN LINE
BECAUSE IF ANYONE
DOES ANYTHING WRONG--
IT'S SO EASY IN THOSE
KINDS OF SETTINGS
FOR THINGS
TO GO WRONG.
IT'S JUST THAT ACTING OUT
YOUR FIRST FEELING.
THEY HAVE THIS INTENSE NEED
TO EXPLORE THEIR WORLD
AND THE WAY
THEY DO IT
IS BY ZOOMING FROM
ONE SPOT TO ANOTHER.
THEY SAY, "CHECK THIS OUT.
THIS LOOKS COOL."
INTERACTING WITH
THEM BRIEFLY.
I GOT IT, GOING ON
TO THE NEXT THING.
WELL, THERE WAS THIS
RED KNOB ON THE WALL
DOWN AT THIS HEIGHT
AND ONE OF THE TWINS
WALKED OVER AND PULLED IT
AND THEN HE SAID,
"WHAT'S THAT?" AND
THAT WAS THE FIRE ALARM.
THINGS LIKE THAT--
PUSHING BUTTONS,
OR PULLING
THE FIRE ALARM.
THAT'S HAPPENED
A COUPLE OF TIMES,
BECAUSE THEY WANT
TO KNOW WHAT IT IS
AND WILL DO IT AND
ASK YOU, "WHAT IS IT?"
(NARRATOR)
SOME EXPERTS THINK
THAT THE CAUSE OF ADHD
MAY BEGIN
IN THE BRAIN.
IT'S NOT
BRAIN DAMAGE.
IT'S PROBABLY RELATED
TO NEUROCHEMISTRY.
THERE ARE NEUROTRANSMITTERS
IN THE BRAIN
AND RESEARCHERS FEEL THAT
THERE ARE DEFICITS OF THESE
NEUROTRANSMITTERS IN CERTAIN
AREAS OF THE BRAIN.
THESE NEUROTRANSMITTERS
ACTUALLY HELP THE BRAIN WORK
AND IF THEY'RE IN INSUFFICIENT
QUANTITY OR QUALITY,
THEN CERTAIN AREAS OF THE BRAIN
ARE NOT AS FUNCTIONAL.
YOU CAN'T SEE THAT
WHEN YOU DO AN X-RAY,
BUT IT WORKS
THAT WAY.
(NARRATOR)
OVER THE YEARS,
ALTERNATIVE TREATMENTS
BASED ON NUTRITION
HAVE BEEN EXPLORED.
ONE DIET, DEVELOPED
BY BENJAMIN FEINGOLD,
INVOLVED ELIMINATING
CERTAIN CHEMICALS AND FOODS
FROM A CHILD'S DIET
AND ENVIRONMENT,
THEN REINTRODUCING THEM
ONE AT A TIME
WHILE THE PARENTS
CAREFULLY OBSERVED
CHANGES IN
THE CHILD'S BEHAVIOR.
CERTAINLY YOU FIND
THAT A CHILD
IS REPORTEDLY SENSITIVE
TO AN ITEM IN THE DIET
OR SOME ENVIRONMENTAL
TYPE OF AGENT.
I THINK WE NEED TO CONSIDER
REMOVING THAT AGENT
FROM THE DIET
OR FROM THE ENVIRONMENT
AND SEE WHAT HAPPENS
TO THE CHILD'S BEHAVIOR.
I THINK WE NEED TO KEEP
SOME OPEN MIND.
MEDICAL RESEARCH DOESN'T
SUPPORT THE FEINGOLD DIET,
THEREFORE, THE MEDICAL COMMUNITY
IS RELUCTANT TO SUPPORT THAT
AND I THINK
THAT'S RATIONAL.
IN THE PAST, A LOT OF THEORIES
HAVE BEEN PROMOTED AND SOLD
AND PUSHED ON PEOPLE
WITHOUT GOOD EVIDENCE
OF THERAPEUTIC BENEFIT.
AND I THINK THAT'S WHAT WE'RE
TRYING TO DO IN MEDICINE NOW
IS USE CONTROLLED STUDIES
TO SUPPORT OUR TREATMENT.
AND I THINK ATTENTION
DEFICIT DISORDER
SHOULD BE TREATED
LIKE ANY OTHER DISEASE.
WE NEED TO HAVE
CONTROLLED RESEARCH
TO PROVE OR DISPROVE
THAT THERAPY IS APPROPRIATE.
OTHERWISE,
A LOT OF PEOPLE
GO THROUGH A LOT OF TROUBLE
WITH THESE DIETS
OR SPECIAL TREATMENTS,
HOMEOPATHIC TREATMENTS,
TO TRY TO ELIMINATE SYMPTOMS
WHEN IT REALLY IS NOT EFFECTIVE.
(NARRATOR)
THE MOST COMMON TREATMENT
FOR THE SYMPTOMS OF ADHD
IS THE USE
OF STIMULANTS.
IF YOU GIVE A CHILD,
WITH ATTENTION DEFICIT
HYPERACTIVITY DISORDER,
STIMULANT MEDICATION,
THIS DECREASES
THEIR SYMPTOMS.
AND WHAT STIMULANT MEDICATION
DOES IS IT INCREASES
THE CONCENTRATION
OF NOREPINEPHRINE
IN SOME OF THESE
NEUROTRANSMITTERS.
(NARRATOR)
IT'S NOT A
"THOUGHT CONTROL" DRUG.
IT DOESN'T MAKE A CHILD WANT
TO DO HOMEWORK OR COOPERATE.
IT JUST HELPS HIM TO FOCUS
WHEN HE IS WORKING.
IT'S NOT A PILL
TO MAKE YOU SMARTER;
IT'S NOT A PILL TO MAKE
YOU A BETTER PERSON.
I THINK IT JUST HELPS THE CHILD
STAY WITH THE PROGRAM,
TO BE FOCUSED ENOUGH TO DO
OR ACCOMPLISH WHAT HE CAN DO.
(NARRATOR)
THERE CAN BE SOME SIDE EFFECTS
ASSOCIATED WITH
USING STIMULANTS, HOWEVER.
A DECREASE IN APPETITE,
PROBLEMS GETTING TO SLEEP,
AND INCREASED ANXIETY
CAN SOMETIMES BE A PROBLEM.
AND IT'S IMPORTANT
THAT THE CHILD
IS TAKING
THE CORRECT DOSAGE.
IF YOU RUN INTO
EXCESSIVE DOSES,
SOMETHING THAT A PARENT
OR TEACHER CAN LOOK FOR
IS EXCESSIVE SEDATION.
CHILDREN BECOME
VERY SEDATE,
THEIR PERFORMANCE
FALLS OFF.
IF YOU GO TOO FAR
WITH STIMULANTS,
INSTEAD OF IMPROVING THEIR
PERFORMANCE AND FUNCTION,
YOU SEE A DECREASE
IN BOTH OF THOSE THINGS.
I HAVE SEEN IT
BE EFFECTIVE.
I CAN'T DENY THAT.
I HAVE SEEN STIMULANTS
AFFECT CHILDREN
IN A VERY POSITIVE WAY.
NOT EVERY CHILD.
I'VE SEEN CHILDREN
WHO IT'S AFFECTED NEGATIVELY.
WE HAVE TO LOOK
AT EACH CHILD
AND SAY,
"DO WE THINK IT CAN HELP?"
I HAVE NO PROBLEM
TRYING IT.
BUT IT
SHOULDN'T BE USED
AS A SOLUTION
IN AND OF ITSELF.
IT'S TOO EASY A CURE
TO PUT A CHILD ON MEDICATION
AND YOU MAY SEE SOME
IMPROVEMENT WITH THOSE CHILDREN,
BUT IS IT REALLY
GOING TO BE LONG TERM?
IS IT REALLY GOING
TO BE SOMETHING
THAT THE CHILD
INTERNALIZES?
(NARRATOR)
PROFESSIONALS AGREE
THAT USING PILLS
TO CONTROL ADHD BEHAVIORS
IS NOT BY ANY MEANS A CURE-ALL.
IT'S ONLY AN AID
AND ONE SMALL FACET
IN THE TOTAL MANAGEMENT
OF THE ADHD CHILD.
SOME CHILDREN MAY HAVE
A LEARNING DISABILITY
IN ADDITION TO ADHD.
IF THAT'S
THE CASE,
THEY MAY NEED EXTRA HELP
IN READING OR MATH.
SOME OF THE HARDEST KIDS
TO REALLY IDENTIFY
ARE THE VERY BRIGHT KIDS
WHO AREN'T HYPERACTIVE
BUT HAVE
ATTENTION DEFICIT
BECAUSE THEY LEARN
TO COMPENSATE FOR IT.
THEY CAN GET BY,
AND DO JUST GOOD ENOUGH
AND PEOPLE TEND TO CALL THEM
UNDERACHIEVERS
AND WONDERING WHEN
THEY'RE GOING TO LIVE UP
TO THEIR POTENTIAL.
A LOT OF THESE KIDS
HAVE THIS
SUBTLE ATTENTION
DEFICIT PROBLEM.
THEY'RE NOT BOUNCING
OFF THE WALLS,
NOT DRIVING
PEOPLE CRAZY,
BUT THEY'RE BRILLIANT
AND NOT PERFORMING WELL,
AND I'VE SEEN SEVERAL
OF THESE KIDS ON MEDICATION
REALLY BEGIN TO IMPROVE
THEIR PERFORMANCE.
(NARRATOR)
SOCIAL SKILLS CAN
ALSO BE A PROBLEM
FOR CHILDREN
WITH ADHD.
ONE OF THE TWINS
DIDN'T HAVE ANY FRIENDS.
EVERYBODY WAS
AFRAID OF HIM,
BECAUSE WHEN
HE'D GET ANGRY,
HE WOULD PUSH, SHOVE,
PINCH AND KICK
AND DIDN'T HAVE
ANY FRIENDS
AND HIS SELF-ESTEEM
WAS EXTREMELY LOW.
THE OTHER TWIN
WAS A LONER
AND DIDN'T HAVE
ANY FRIENDS
BECAUSE HE DIDN'T WANT
TO BE BOTHERED WITH ANYONE.
IT MAKES
A LOT OF SENSE
BECAUSE IF YOU'RE HAVING
TROUBLE FOCUSING,
YOU'RE NOT CATCHING THE SIGNALS
PEOPLE ARE SENDING YOU--
THE LOOK
ON SOMEONE'S FACE,
OR TELLING YOU
THEY'VE HAD ENOUGH,
OR "THAT'S NOT FUNNY.
LEAVE ME ALONE."
IF YOU MISS THAT AND CONTINUE
DOING WHAT YOU WERE DOING,
YOU'LL GET SOMEBODY MAD,
OR FRUSTRATED WITH YOU.
AND BECAUSE
THEY'RE IMPULSIVE,
THEY DON'T STOP
AND THINK,
"WHAT WOULD BE
MY NEXT STRATEGY
TO GET ALONG BETTER."
THEY POKE AT SOMEONE
OR DO SOMETHING
BECAUSE THEY'RE DESPERATE
TO RECONNECT
WITH THAT PERSON.
THEY TEND TO DO A LOT OF THINGS
THAT DON'T WORK.
THE BOYS ATTEND
A SUPPORT GROUP AT SCHOOL
WITH ONE OF
THE SOCIAL WORKERS
AND THEY TALK ABOUT
BEHAVIOR MODIFICATION.
THEY TALK ABOUT HOW TO GET
ALONG WITH OTHER CHILDREN.
WHAT DO YOU DO
WHEN YOU GET ANGRY?
WHAT ARE SOME
ALTERNATIVES
TO HITTING OR PUSHING
WHEN YOU GET ANGRY?
WHAT ARE
GOOD CHOICES?
(NARRATOR)
PARENTS AND SIBLINGS
MAY WANT TO JOIN
A SUPPORT GROUP
TO SHARE INFORMATION
AND FEELINGS.
IT WAS VERY FRUSTRATING
BECAUSE I DIDN'T UNDERSTAND IT.
I DIDN'T KNOW
WHAT WAS GOING ON
UNTIL WE GOT THE DIAGNOSIS
AND THE EXPLANATION.
MEETING WITH OTHER PARENTS
WAS WONDERFUL,
BECAUSE YOU MEET
OTHER PEOPLE
WHO ARE FEELING THE SAME
KIND OF GUILT THAT YOU FEEL.
JUST NOT BEING
ADEQUATE AS A PERSON--
AND AS A PARENT,
VERY DIFFICULT.
I'M SEEING A KID
OR A FAMILY--
I'M MAKING SURE
I BRING THE SIBLING IN
TO SEE HOW
THEY'RE DOING,
MAKE SURE TOO MUCH PRESSURE
ISN'T ON THEM.
OFTEN THEY FEEL
THEY HAVE TO BE GOOD
BECAUSE "MOM AND DAD'S
HAVING A HARD TIME
WITH MY SIBLING."
AND ITUTS LOTS
OF PRESSURE ON THEM
BECAUSE THEY FEEL
THEY'VE GOT TO PERFORM WELL
OR THINGS
ARE UNFAIR
AND THEY'RE GETTING
A RAW DEAL.
AND I THINK
IT'S IMPORTANT
WE FIND A BALANCE
FOR THEM
OF ASKING FOR
A LITTLE EXTRA FROM THEM
BECAUSE THEIR BROTHER
OR SISTER'S HAVING A PROBLEM.
BUT ALSO MAKING SURE
THAT THEY'RE NOT CARRYING
AN ADULT LOAD
OF RESPONSIBILITY
AND MAKING SURE THAT
THEY'RE NOT DOING THE JOB
THAT THE PARENT
REALLY NEEDS TO DO.
(NARRATOR)
PROFESSIONALS CAN ALSO OFFER
PRACTICAL SUGGESTIONS
ON HOW PARENTS
CAN MAKE THINGS GO MORE
SMOOTHLY AT HOME.
DISORGANIZATION
IS A PROBLEM
WITH KIDS
WHO GET DISTRACTED.
IT'S HARD TO KEEP
TRACK OF THINGS.
YOU SET OUT TO DO ONE THING
AND YOU FORGET.
SOME PARENTS
WILL MAKE LISTS
THEY POST
ON THE DOOR.
DO YOU HAVE
A) YOUR LUNCHBOX
B) YOUR BACKPACK
OR THEY'LL PUT A NOTE
ON THE KITCHEN DOOR
SO THE CHILD CAN'T LEAVE
WITHOUT SEEING THIS.
SOMETHING A PARENT
CAN DO
IS MAKE THE TASKS
MORE SPECIFIC
AND THEN PROVIDE
ENCOURAGEMENT.
SO IT'S NOT,
"GO CLEAN YOUR ROOM."
BUT IT'S,
"PICK UP ALL THE CLOTHING
"AND PUT IT IN
THIS LAUNDRY BASKET.
"EXCELLENT YOU
DID THAT.
LET'S MOVE ONTO
THE NEXT STEP."
THESE KIDS CAN'T
FOLLOW MULTIPLE REQUESTS
BECAUSE THEY
GET DISTRACTED.
YOU DON'T TELL THEM
TO DO A,B,C, AND D
BECAUSE WHILE
THEY'RE DOING A,
THEY WILL FORGET.
SO YOU GIVE THEM ONE
OR TWO THINGS AT A TIME,
TO MAKE THINGS
MORE HELPFUL.
(NARRATOR)
EVENTUALLY, AS A CHILD
WITH ADHD GETS OLDER,
THE HYPERACTIVITY AND
IMPULSIVENESS MAY DECREASE.
CHILDREN NEED TO LEARN
THROUGH TESTING ON THEIR OWN
WHAT WORKS AND
WHAT DOESN'T WORK
AND MANY ADULTS END UP
NOT TAKING MEDICATION
BUT THEY CONTROL
THEIR ENVIRONMENT
AND THEY DO THINGS
THAT HELP THEM GET BY
WITHOUT MEDICATIONS.
THEY MAY STILL HAVE SOME OF THE
ATTENTION DEFICIT SYMPTOMS--
THEY MAY NOT BE
AS EXTREME--
BUT CAN CONTROL
THE ENVIRONMENT MORE.
(NARRATOR)
UNFORTUNATELY, A LOT OF DAMAGE
MAY HAVE ALREADY BEEN DONE
TO THE CHILD'S SELF-ESTEEM
BEFORE DIAGNOSIS
AND TREATMENT BEGAN.
HE MAY NEED EXTRA PRAISE
AND ENCOURAGEMENT
BEFORE HE CAN BEGIN
TO FEEL GOOD ABOUT HIMSELF.
IT'S SIMILAR TO WATERING
THAT PLANT.
WE NEED TO FIND OUT WHAT
THIS PARTICULAR PLANT NEEDS.
IS IT JUST WATER
OR IS IT NUTRIENTS?
IS IT MORE SUNLIGHT
THAT THIS PLANT NEEDS?
WHEN WE'RE ABLE
TO FIGURE THAT OUT
AND PROVIDE FOR THIS CHILD
WHAT HE NEEDS,
WE BEGIN
TO SEE GROWTH.